the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
let's try the count down again you can
just give it to them from now we'll
figure it out later
I like to ask people to explain now that
they know that the what the right answer
is if someone will explain why that is
the right answer and I know it's a big
class and people sometimes get nervous
about talking so I bribe people so today
the person who answers why that is
correct we'll get an MIT chemistry
t-shirt okay
all right let's see for every if you
think five miles of empty you need 15
moles of hydrogen gas so since there's
not enough hydrogen gas there's only ten
most that means the hydrogen gas would
be the limiting reactant since you would
need roughly 33 point 33 moles of n2 for
a great and here is an MIT chemistry to
say okay so you'll notice that the
prizes are good in the beginning get
worse throughout the semester and good
again at the end so keep that in mind
okay so let's try to get started it's
been a little bit of a crazy start if
people are still having clicker problems
we have a couple more clicker questions
that you can try out and we'll get your
clickers working by the end of class
today so the topics today we're going to
be talking about the discovery of the
electron and of the nucleus and I said
that there's going to be sort of limited
amounts or every time I have a sort of a
lecture that has some history I'm going
to counter that with some modern
chemistry so next week we're going to
have two examples of modern uses but
today we're going to do a little history
and I like history especially when it
can lead to a cool demo so you might
have noticed something demo like he-men
while we are doing the clickers so
that's always good and I also kind of
like talking about history when I feel
like it's a great example of a challenge
that chemists face and really most
scientists face that they used to face
and still currently face which is that
chemists study small particles they
study things that are really tiny how do
you study something that's really small
how do you demonstrate that something
that is invisible to the eye actually
exists so this is a common challenge and
so today I'm going to tell you about how
the electron and the nucleus were
discovered at a time a very low-tech
time in our scientific history how they
were able to figure this out and and
sort of set the stage of what people
were thinking around this time and how
these discoveries really changed
everything so in the late 1890s chemists
were patting each other on the back and
physicists too are thinking boy we have
it all figured out we have a real
complete understanding of our universe
we have atomic theory of matter we have
Newtonian mechanics this is really great
and in fact someone said these words
which are really dangerous words that
our future discoveries must be looked
for in the 6th decimal place so you know
honestly I think when I started studying
chemistry I kind of thought everything
about chemistry was probably already
known and it was just sort of
fine-tuning things I was absolutely
wrong at that time and this statement
was absolutely wrong and really came
right before the major discovery of the
electron where they realized they hadn't
really understood anything about the
atomic theory of matter so more
experiments are always dangerous because
they can change everything and that's
why I really like science all right so
the experiment I'm going to tell you
today JJ Thompson's discovery of the
electron or one of the experiments I'll
tell you about today and this is really
a pretty simple experiment
so JJ Thompson was interested in this
thing called cathode rays
he had hydrogen gas and he took an
evacuated glass cylinder and he put
hydrogen gas in it and then he applied a
current to that and he could see these
Rays coming off and he thought that was
pretty cool and so he was wondering
about these Rays you know are they made
up of of negatively charged particles
positively charged particles and they
neutral what what are these things so we
decided to do this experiment and he
wondered whether if he took two plates
and and had charges associated with them
whether he would see the cathode rays
deflected or not
well first he didn't put apply any
current so it was just neutral just to
see if putting these plates in would
affect anything in any way and so when
he did that when there was zero zero
voltage difference between these two
plates he could see the cow
Raye hit this phosphor screen and there
was no deflection
all right then he said okay now I'm
gonna charge things up and see if I can
see a deflection so he did that and he
saw the following there was a deflection
and so now the different voltage between
the plates was greater than zero and now
he saw the cathode ray was being
deflected a different distance of Delta
x over here and it was being deflected
toward the positive plate so that said
to him that the cathode ray contain
negatively charged particles you'll
notice that the word negatively is the
only word on the screen in blue and if
you look at your notes you'll see that
there's a blank spot just pointing out
there might be a correlation there okay
so he knew some things also from
classical work that was done on the time
and didn't reset my boards so he knew
something about what what it meant if
there was just deflection so we had our
deflection of the negatively charged
particles and he knew that that was
going to be proportional to the charge
of the negatively charged particle and
it was going to be directly proportional
to that and inversely proportional to
the mass of the negatively charged
particle so it was a pretty big
deflection so he wasn't sure maybe there
was a very big charge or maybe there was
a very small mass or maybe both so then
he wanted to see what happened if he
really kind of got things going and he
applied even more a voltage difference
so he did that and when he did that he
saw this he saw another deflection but
this time it was much smaller and it was
toward the negatively charged plate
so he realized that in addition to the
negatively charged particle there was
also a positively charged particle so
for that particle then the deflection of
the positively charged particle should
also be proportional to the charge on
the positively charged particle and
inversely proportional to the mass of
the positively charged particle but
there was a big difference in this
deflection toward the positive plate
there was a big deflection but toward
the negative plate it was pretty small
so he knew that this deflection was much
bigger than that one and then he thought
about was that going to be due to charge
her mass but he said the charges should
be the same because the new it's neutral
normally so those charges must equal
each other the absolute values at least
must equal each other so then we can
think about the comparison of these
deflections so if we take the absolute
value of the deflection of the
negatively charged particle over the
absolute value of the deflection of the
positively charged particle on the top
here we're gonna have the charge of the
negatively charged particle over the
mass of the negatively charged particle
and the absolute value of that term over
the charge of the positively charged
particle over the mass of the positively
charged particle but now if you say that
the charges are equal to each other at
least the absolute values of them we can
get rid of that term and just see that
the mask
of the positively charged particle over
the negatively charged particle remains
so if this is going to be big and we
know it is it's a big difference the
negatively charged particle deflected a
lot more than the positively charged
particle that means that the difference
in masses also has to be big and that
that negatively charged particle must be
a lot smaller in mass than the
positively charged particle so we go so
the mass of the negatively charged
particle must be a lot smaller than the
mass of the positively charged particle
and actually it's about two thousand
times smaller so he was able to figure
all of this out by just doing this
pretty simple experiment so he had now a
small negatively charged particle and
also a positively charged particle and
later the negatively charged particle
got a name the negatively charged
particle got the name of the electron
and it's mass was determined in another
interesting experiment I won't tell you
about and it was determined to be really
small about nine times 10 to the minus
31 kilograms so through this experiment
he was able to figure out that in these
cathode rays you had something that was
tiny this electron and that means that
this idea that atoms were the smallest
thing out there was incorrect that's
what everyone believed they're patting
themselves on the back they had figured
it all out but there was something
smaller than the atom there was this
electron this negatively charged
particle that was really tiny so that's
pretty cool it's pretty low-tech
experiment and figured out something
that really changed the way that we
thought about some about science so what
about the nucleus so we had the electron
and we're also had this idea there was
something positively charged going on
there and of course in that experiment
that was each plus but what about what
about the nucleus so Rutherford is
credited with the discovery of the
nucleus so this was a little later and
and he had been studying radioactive
material and his good friend Marie Curie
from France would often send him
interesting samples for him to study I'm
not sure quite how they got from France
to England some of these were really
cancer-causing things I don't know how
many people touch them without safety
precautions on the way but but anyway
it's interesting to note that Redford
actually did not die of cancer despite
this research he was literally the
victim of his own success so after his
great discovery of the nucleus which
I'll tell you about he he was made into
he was became a knight and at one point
he became sick and he needed a doctor
well if you're a knight in England you
can't just have any old doctor treat you
you need to have a doctor that is also a
knight and so while he was waiting for a
doctor of the appropriate ranking to
come and treat him he died so he
literally died of his own success he was
a victim of his own success but it
wasn't just his success as I'll tell you
about he had some help he had a really
good graduate student a really good
undergraduate student helping him out so
he was studying these alpha particles
that were being emitted from this
radioactive material and we know now
that this is helium plus two ions but
that was not known at the time they just
knew something was coming coming out of
this radioactive material and they want
to find out what what it was and
characterized the properties of this so
he had a postdoc named Hans Geiger and
this is the Geiger of the Geiger counter
and he also had an undergraduate student
Amar's Dhin and so together they did the
following experiment and I wasn't you
know obviously there but I'm imagining
that by they did the following
experiment it meant the undergraduate
and the graduate student or maybe even
just the undergraduate okay so here was
the experiment they had the radioactive
material alpha particles were coming off
and they had built to detect
that would count how many alpha
particles were coming off and so they
did the experiment and they counted and
they found there were a lot of particles
132,000 alpha particles per minute in
fact so then they said okay let's see
what happens if we put a piece of foil
in the path of the alpha particles and
we're gonna have really really thin gold
foil so this is like smaller than a
human hair this is really really thin
foil and they shot alpha particles at it
and they counted and they got
approximately I don't know how many
significant figures but 132,000 alpha
particles seem to be in terms of the
significant figures the same so it was
just going through these alpha particles
were just going through this thin gold
foil so they had this sort of vision
then of the gold atoms being all empty
space and the the alpha particles were
just going through no problem but then
they did one more experiment and by then
I think this was the undergraduate so
they had built this detector and you
know they had built the detector so it
could move so they wanted you know
sometimes you design something to do
something you actually want to use it
for that so if we have the alpha
particles coming this way and on the
detector over here and it had been
sitting and I had been collecting it the
undergraduate was told well put the
detector over there and see what happens
so the undergraduate moved the detector
over here and he said you're gonna see
if the alpha particles hit the gold foil
and back scatter so we'll have the
detector over here so the undergraduate
did this they didn't think it was gonna
do anything I needed something for the
undergraduate to do so they hadn't do
that and then they counted and sure
enough
click-click
it wasn't a lot but there seem to be
some backscatter about 20 counts 20
alpha particles per minute that was not
expected they were expecting zero so
they could they were detecting
backscattering
the alpha particles were bouncing off
that thin gold foil and coming back at
the move detector so they could
calculate this probability of
backscattering the account rate of the
back scattering over the normal account
of the particles and so they had 20 back
scattering events or 20 counts over the
132,000 two times - or ten to the minus
four point zero two percent this is
small very small but it was not zero and
I don't know how many times they did
this experiment but I can imagine there
were lots of times they did the
experiment that no one would really
believe this result and Rutherford
himself said it was about as credible as
if you had fired a 15-inch shell and a
piece of tissue paper and it came back
and hit you so that's how he felt about
it he was like I don't understand how
this is working this is so thin it's
like tissue paper but yet these alpha
particles are bouncing off something so
what did this all mean once they had
repeated the experiment many times so
their interpretation then was that these
gold atoms were in fact mostly empty
they sit seemed like all the alpha
particles were just going through most
of them were just passing through and
not hitting anything but there was
something in there that could be hit
there was some concentrated mass in this
volume that when the alpha particle hit
that directly it back scattered and they
later called this the nucleus so they
came up then with this new model the
Rutherford model model where he had
mostly empty space
but you had
and traded mass in inside that an alpha
particle might hit and then back scatter
and Rutherford assumed that the
electrons would be in that empty space
and that this positive mass was going to
be positively charged because he knew
the overall atom was going to be neutral
so just a little nomenclature we can
think about the charge of the electrons
in the atom as being equal to minus Z to
the e where Z is our atomic number and E
is the absolute value of the electrons
charge and if this term is negative then
the charge on the nucleus is going to be
positive so we have positive Z to the e
because overall the atom is going to be
neutral then Rutherford went on to
actually use this back scattering to
measure the diameter of this positively
charged dense part of the atom of the
nucleus and he was able to measure that
diameter as a very small number 10 to
the minus 14th meters so he did this
with this back scattering experiment she
might say how can you get a diameter
from this back scattering and so that's
what we're gonna try right now ourselves
we're gonna do an experiment and
professor Sylvia Sara originally came up
with the experiment to do in class and
so she built the first version of this
gold foil right here and it was
originally part she took something apart
from her own research program since then
it's been replicated so that she doesn't
have to shut down her research lab every
year when we do this experiment in class
so here imagine this as a piece of gold
foil and it's mostly empty space but
there are some small concentrated nuclei
gold nuclei these styrofoam balls
if we have over here some alpha
particles which we happen to have 502
alpha particles if the ping if the alpha
particle hits the concentrated part it
should back scatter otherwise it should
go through so you are now going to be
radioactive material it's I don't know
is that the first time you've been
called radioactive material I'm not sure
but we're going to come around
everyone who can have one or two of
these so let me just tell you you need
to watch your ping pong ball once you
get it you can move to the center watch
your ping pong ball if it hits the edge
of this it's not a backscatter watch if
it goes through or if it back scatters
and you will click in whether you had a
backscatter
event or not and from that information
we will calculate the diameter of the
nucleus trying to put up the clicker
I think everyone's good
we have anymore
okay everyone if you want to get up and
get a better vantage point do so and let
the experiment begin I'm moving out of
the way
okay
so go ahead and say whether you had 1 2
or 0 backscatter events and if your
clicker isn't working we'll ask you to
raise your hand and tell us especially
if it was a backscatter event
as everyone had a chance to click in
it's everyone clicked in you can't tell
alright
yeah we're going to count down go ahead
and click in and then we're going to do
the calculation
like
okay actually we need to calculate the
actual number of them not the percent
yeah all right so we had some back
scatter events so let's see if we can
use this information to actually
calculate the diameter of the gold
nuclei all right so we are going to talk
about the probability of backscattering
so we have the probability is equal to
the number of ping-pong balls back
scattered back scattered over the total
number and this will be related to the
radius of those gold nuclei by the
following so we have the probability is
going to be equal to the area of the
nuclei the total area over the area of
the whole atoms so basically the piece
of foil and then that's going to be
further equal to the number of nuclei
times the area per nucleus again over
the area the area of all the atoms or
the piece of foil okay so we know some
of this information so I'm gonna move
this up yep you have an actual number
okay
36 total oh that's interesting okay it's
a lot of backscattering okay so we can
plug in some of these numbers now so we
have the probability is going to be
equal someone counted
I didn't count but someone counted that
there were a hundred and twenty nuclei
and the area is going to be PI R squared
and someone measured the entire frame or
the size of the piece of film as a
hundred and thirty nine thousand
centimeters squared or it was one point
three nine meters squared
okay so we'll assume that they counted
the nuclei to three significant figures
then it's exactly one hundred and twenty
and we'll assume that they measured the
box with three significant figures as
well okay so now we can solve this for R
the radius or for the diameter so if we
now solve for the radius
we'll bring the radius over and we'll
have the square root of the probability
and if we take these numbers and all I
did the math I have a calculator someone
wants to check six point zero seven two
centimeters and then the diameter is
going to just be equal to twice that so
we have the square root of the
probability times twelve point one four
centimeters and now we need to calculate
the probability so the probability is
going to be the number of backscattered
which was 36 36 over 502 someone want to
have a calculator someone gonna check my
math check math for me check math
anybody I don't have another prize thank
you all right what's it was it 26 or 36
I can't read up there
double excellent checking math for me
here okay 26 and so what does this come
out to be what point zero five zero and
now we need to plug that in so we have D
equals the square root of point zero
five zero times twelve point one four
and what does that come out to be point
two point seven one and the actual was
two point five not bad
so using methods very similar to this
Rutherford was able to figure out what
the diameter of the nucleus was and this
was a really important achievement of
the time okay so in the last few minutes
maybe I'll move this down in the last
few minutes we want to talk about the
fallout of all of these great
experiments and all of these great
results so we now know there's an
electron and a nucleus so there's
subatomic particles what does that mean
in terms of what people thought they
understood about atomic theory so we had
this question then okay so we have a
nucleus positively charged an electron
negatively charged and there's a
distance between them they wanted to
know why do they stay apart why does the
electron not crash into the nucleus so
from classical description we have
coulombs force law which tells us about
the force when you have two charge
particles Q 1 and Q 2 so the charge on
the particles and you have over 4 times
pi times this easier this permittivity
constant times the distance R squared so
if you apply a force then and you have
charged particles if those particles
have the same sign then acceleration
should push them apart the force should
be positive and repulsive so two things
with the same charge don't want to be
near each other it's going to be
repulsive if like in this case you have
two things that have opposite signs
acceleration should pull them together
and here the force should be
negative and attractive so that's the
situation we're in here pawsley charged
nucleus negatively charged electron so
let's consider then a hydrogen atom z
equals one one electron one proton let's
think about what happens when you have
an infinite distance between them so if
they're infinitely far apart what is
going to be the force you can just yell
out the answer zero right they don't
feel each other they don't know anything
about each other they're infinitely far
apart there's no force but that's not
going to be the situation and the atom
atoms are small so they're gonna be
somewhat near each other now we can
think about what happens if they're
right on top of each other and r0 and
here we can try out the clickers one
more time
okay so we'll do ten seconds oh the
color has changed so most people had
it's infinitely attractive so infinitely
attractive like most chemists accept
Avogadro he's very strange-looking okay
so if these things are going to be close
to each other then they should be
attracted to each other and collapse
into each other so why then are the
electron and the nucleus that are
infinitely attracted to each other why
do they stay apart so Coulomb's law is
not helping us understand this but it's
really just talking about the force with
respect to a distance it's not telling
us anything about what happens when our
changes with time so we'll find in
chemistry sometimes that things are
spontaneous in one direction but they're
also very slow so you don't have the
thing doesn't happen it's just it's just
kinetically very slow so let's consider
time now and maybe that will help us
understand why this is not working it
doesn't but let's let's let's let's look
at that so what do we know about time
what do we know about acceleration and
force and time we need a classical
equation of motion that can explain how
the electron and the nucleus could move
under force so we have our good friend
we have Newton's second law we have F
equals MA force equals mass times
acceleration so let's think about what
this tells us about the electron and the
nucleus so we can express force as a
function of velocity we can also do that
in terms of distance so now let's think
about what's happening we know the force
we can calculate the force from the
coulombs force law the force between
the nucleus and the electron and then we
can think about two different distances
and with that force how fast the
particles should move toward each other
so for the initial distance we can put
take point five angstroms or 0.5 times
10 to the 10 meters so that's about the
radius of a hydrogen atom so we take
that distance and then we want to think
about how fast that would then go to
zero and it's fast approximately 10 to
the 10 seconds or the electron should
plummet into the nucleus in about 0.1
nanoseconds it doesn't do that though so
we have these beautiful classical laws
I'm a big fan of F equals MA I like all
these things but it's not working to
describe what's happening here so we
discovered the electron discover the
nucleus but now we have a new problem we
don't understand why the electron isn't
plummeting into the nucleus so what
what's the problem here so is the
problem the coulombs force or Newton's
second law and it turns out as most of
you are probably aware it's that
classical mechanics doesn't work when
you consider things on this size scale
so we need a new way to describe what's
going on here classical mechanics isn't
working and so we need quantum mechanics
and so that is allowing us to understand
the behavior that we're actually
observing we're not observing this
plummeting so there must be a better way
to do this and when you're on this
really small scale you need a different
way to describe the behavior and so next
week we're going to be moving in and
thinking about quantum mechanics and if
anyone's still having clicker questions
or needs a clicker we'll be down here to
help you out and otherwise I will
you on Monday
you